README.md, before:

This package is a GPL implementation of an iptables and netfilter module for
nDPI integration into the Linux kernel 5.4+.

It is based on an initial implementation for Ubuntu 14.04 by [Humberto
Jucá](https://github.com/betolj/ndpi-netfilter), recently updated for
Ubuntu 20.04 by
[prizraksarvar](https://github.com/prizraksarvar/ndpi-netfilter) with
refinements by [Chris
Nelson](https://github.com/ChrisNelson-CyberReef).

# Prerequisites

Earlier versions of this module included documentation for
reconfiguring the 2.x kernel to enable the required Netfilter
Connection Tracking.  Around version 4.16 of the kernel, that was
turned on by default so kernel changes are no longer required; this
should work on generic Ubuntu 20.04.

You _will_ need kernal headers and some other packages to build and
install this module.

```
  apt-get install -y libtool
  apt-get install -y pkg-config
  apt-get install -y libpcap-dev
  apt-get install -y libxtables-dev
  apt-get install -y libip6tc-dev
  apt-get install -y libip4tc-dev
  apt-get install -y libjson-c-dev
  apt-get install -y linux-source linux-headers-`uname -r`
  ln -s /usr/src/linux-headers-`uname -r` /lib/modules/`uname -r`/build
```

# nDPI

This module depends on
[nDPI](https://www.ntop.org/products/deep-packet-inspection/ndpi/),
"Open and Extensible LGPLv3 Deep Packet Inspection Library."  Their [GitHub repository](https://github.com/ntop/nDPI) is used as a submodule of this repository.  You must clone this repository with a command like:

```
  git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/TechTeamCR/ndpi-netfilter
```

With that done, go to where you cloned the code and do:

```
  git submodule sync
  git submodule update
  cd nDPI
  ./autogen.sh && ./configure && make
  sudo make install
```

# Building the module

The `ndpi-netfilter` build needs to know where to find the nDPI source (built in the previous step).  Specify the `NDPI_PATH` with a command like:

```
  NDPI_PATH=`pwd`/nDPI make
  sudo make modules_install
  sudo mkdir /lib/xtables/
  sudo cp ipt/libxt_ndpi.so /lib/xtables/
  sudo cp ipt/libxt_ndpi.so /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/xtables/
```

# Loading the Module

You can remove the previously loaded version of the module, if any, with:

```
  sudo modprobe -r xt_ndpi
```

You can install the current version of the module with:

```
  sudo modprobe xt_ndpi
```

Some run-time tracing can be enabled with the `debug_dpi` parameter:
```
  sudo modprobe xt_ndpi debug_dpi=1
```

# Enabling Connection Tracking

Connection tracking must be turned on in iptables with a command like:

```
  sudo iptables -t mangle -A PREROUTING -j CONNMARK --restore-mark
  sudo iptables -t mangle -A POSTROUTING -j CONNMARK --save-mark
```

# Testing

You can see the protocols supported by this module with:

```
  iptables -m ndpi --help
```

You can see if the DHCP dissector is working by creating a rule:
```
  iptables -t mangle -A PREROUTING -m ndpi --icmp -j ACCEPT
```
Then pinging a remote system:
```
  ping google.com
```
Then looking at the counters for the rules you created:
```
 sudo iptables-save -c | grep icmp
```
You should see non-0 packet and byte counters at the start of the line:

 [0:0] -A PREROUTING -m ndpi --icmp  -j ACCEPT

Commit message:

Clarify procedure for using ICMP to test module

README.md, after:

This package is a GPL implementation of an iptables and netfilter module for
nDPI integration into the Linux kernel 5.4+.

It is based on an initial implementation for Ubuntu 14.04 by [Humberto
Jucá](https://github.com/betolj/ndpi-netfilter), recently updated for
Ubuntu 20.04 by
[prizraksarvar](https://github.com/prizraksarvar/ndpi-netfilter) with
refinements by [Chris
Nelson](https://github.com/ChrisNelson-CyberReef).

# Prerequisites

Earlier versions of this module included documentation for
reconfiguring the 2.x kernel to enable the required Netfilter
Connection Tracking.  Around version 4.16 of the kernel, that was
turned on by default so kernel changes are no longer required; this
should work on generic Ubuntu 20.04.

You _will_ need kernal headers and some other packages to build and
install this module.

```
  apt-get install -y libtool
  apt-get install -y pkg-config
  apt-get install -y libpcap-dev
  apt-get install -y libxtables-dev
  apt-get install -y libip6tc-dev
  apt-get install -y libip4tc-dev
  apt-get install -y libjson-c-dev
  apt-get install -y linux-source linux-headers-`uname -r`
  ln -s /usr/src/linux-headers-`uname -r` /lib/modules/`uname -r`/build
```

# nDPI

This module depends on
[nDPI](https://www.ntop.org/products/deep-packet-inspection/ndpi/),
"Open and Extensible LGPLv3 Deep Packet Inspection Library."  Their [GitHub repository](https://github.com/ntop/nDPI) is used as a submodule of this repository.  You must clone this repository with a command like:

```
  git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/TechTeamCR/ndpi-netfilter
```

With that done, go to where you cloned the code and do:

```
  git submodule sync
  git submodule update
  cd nDPI
  ./autogen.sh && ./configure && make
  sudo make install
```

# Building the module

The `ndpi-netfilter` build needs to know where to find the nDPI source (built in the previous step).  Specify the `NDPI_PATH` with a command like:

```
  NDPI_PATH=`pwd`/nDPI make
  sudo make modules_install
  sudo mkdir /lib/xtables/
  sudo cp ipt/libxt_ndpi.so /lib/xtables/
  sudo cp ipt/libxt_ndpi.so /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/xtables/
```

# Loading the Module

You can remove the previously loaded version of the module, if any, with:

```
  sudo modprobe -r xt_ndpi
```

You can install the current version of the module with:

```
  sudo modprobe xt_ndpi
```

Some run-time tracing can be enabled with the `debug_dpi` parameter:
```
  sudo modprobe xt_ndpi debug_dpi=1
```

# Enabling Connection Tracking

Connection tracking must be turned on in iptables with a command like:

```
  sudo iptables -t mangle -A PREROUTING -j CONNMARK --restore-mark
  sudo iptables -t mangle -A POSTROUTING -j CONNMARK --save-mark
```

# Testing

You can see the protocols supported by this module with:

```
  iptables -m ndpi --help
```

You can see if the module is loaded and basically working by creating
a rule for `ICMP` (This doesn't exercise much of the module because
there is special-case code for handling `ICMP`.)

```
  iptables -t mangle -A PREROUTING -m ndpi --icmp -j ACCEPT
```

Then pinging a remote system:
```
  ping google.com
```
Then looking at the counters for the rules you created:
```
 sudo iptables-save -c | grep icmp
```
You should see non-0 packet and byte counters at the start of the line:

 [0:0] -A PREROUTING -m ndpi --icmp  -j ACCEPT
